---
keywords:
  - concepts
  - smart contracts
  - allowance

description: First let's talk about some important concepts about smart contracts in general and then about ISC smart contract concepts in particular.

image: /img/logo/WASP_logo_dark.png
---

# Smart Contract Concepts

First let's talk about some important general concepts of smart contracts, and then about
ISC-specific smart contract concepts.

## General Concepts

Smart contracts consist of a number of functions that operate on their state storage.
These functions are guaranteed to run deterministically. That means that given certain
input data and input storage state they will always produce the same output data and
output storage state. Determinism is key because it is the only way to be able to
validate their execution results independently.

The consequence of this is that it is impossible for a smart contract to go out and fetch
data from external sources, because these sources cannot be guaranteed to be the same at
every invocation. Smart contract function calls are therefore always following the data
push model. They need to receive a complete, atomic set of input data. This is important
to remember, because in most other programming applications it is very common to pull
external data into running code whenever required. This changes the mental model necessary
for building smart contract solutions considerably.

Smart contract functions have no access to a file system, nor can they use timing or
randomness sources. Any time or randomness data must be provided as part of the input
data. Changes to global static data in the smart contract code itself will not persist
between separate smart contract function calls. Multi-threading is also highly
non-deterministic and its usage is therefore not allowed.

To make sure that timing differences between processors do not influence the consensus
outcome of long-running processes, and to prevent endless loops, smart contracts use a
system where the maximum running time of a function is bounded by an amount of **gas**
that is provided at the moment of invocation. Each Wasm instruction and each ISC API call
burns a certain amount of gas, and therefore any function that runs out of gas will do so
at the exact same point, no matter who runs it. This is the only way to be able to have
Turing-complete computing that is bounded in a deterministic way. Gas is not just used to
limit the amount of (finite) processing resources that can be used, but it can also be
used to assign a monetary cost to the actual amount of processing resources used when
running a smart contract function by associating a fee per unit of gas used.

## ISC-specific Concepts

A unique feature of ISC is its ability to run multiple blockchains in parallel securely.
Requests can arrive asynchronously, but each separate blockchain is guaranteed to handle
its requests synchronously, ordered by consensus between the chain's processing nodes.
Each chain runs its own set of smart contracts. Some are built-in (core) contracts,
others are user-defined, dynamically loaded contracts.

Within a blockchain contracts can call each other's functionality either synchronously or
asynchronously. Synchronous calls are akin to a subroutine call. Asynchronous calls are
wrapped in a request transaction and posted on the Tangle, to be executed sometime after
the current set of requests has been processed.

This same asynchronous request mechanism can be used to post calls to smart contracts in
other blockchains. Delivery of such request transactions is guaranteed, but processing of
these requests is only guaranteed as long as the target blockchain is active.

Although smart contracts will always post asynchronous requests on the Tangle, and it is
possible to do this from a user application as well, there is a price to be paid in the
form of having to wait for confirmation pf the request on the Tangle before it can be
processed. Therefore, ISC also allows user applications to send requests directly to a
blockchain through a web API provided by the processing nodes. We call such requests
_off-ledger_ requests, as opposed to the _on-ledger_ requests that are posted directly on
the Tangle ledger. Off-ledger requests can be sent at a much higher frequency than
off-ledger requests, but on-ledger requests offer a few additional features that are not
available to off-ledger requests.

In both cases requests are initiated by a so-called _sender_. The sender signs the request
with its private key and can therefore be uniquely and securely identified. We also
identify a _caller_ to a smart contract function. While a request is being processed the
sender will stay the same, but the caller will change with every synchronous call that is
being made. This will allow the transfer of assets between calls to different contracts
within the chain, and allows the called function to easily identify the origin of these
assets. Note that a function can only access assets that were provided by the caller of
the function. So even though the original sender of the request is known at any call
depth, only the top level function can access the assets that the sender provided to the
request.

The way assets are provided to a smart contract function is by specifying a so-called
_allowance_. The function is allowed (but not required) to transfer ownership of the
assets indicated in the allowance to itself, depending on the requirements of the
function. The allowance is taken out of the on-chain account of the caller. This means
that the caller needs to make sure that these assets are available in the account when
the call is executed. For off-ledger requests this means that prior to sending the request
sufficient assets need to be deposited in the sender's on-chain account. For on-ledger
requests the assets may also have been deposited prior to sending the request, or they may
be sent along as part of the request.

Any assets that are sent to a chain as part of an on-ledger request will end up in the
sender's on-chain account. The allowance mechanism makes it impossible for assets to
inadvertently be sent to a wrong or non-existing contract and become lost forever. Any
assets that are not handled by any contract will safely stay in the sender's on-chain
account and can be withdrawn by the sender at any time.

In the next section we will explore how smart contracts use the WasmLib
[Call Context](context.mdx).
