---
keywords:
  - functions
  - views
  - Funcs
  - ScFuncContext
  - ScViewContext

description: The call context is a predefined parameter to each smart contract function, which allows you to access the functionality that the call environment provides.

image: /img/logo/WASP_logo_dark.png
---

# Call Context

Due to the sandboxed nature of Wasm code, it needs a host which runs the Wasm Virtual
Machine (VM) that is able to load and execute the Wasm code. The host also provides the
Wasm code with restricted access to the host environment. These restrictions make the host
environment itself sandboxed as well. Smart contracts will only be able to call certain
environment functionality, depending on the _call context_.

We distinguish between two types of smart contract function calls:

- **Func**, which allows full mutable access to the smart contract state, and always
  results in a state update. Funcs can be initiated through on-ledger and off-ledger
  requests. A call to a Func is only complete once the associated state update has been
  registered in the ledger (Tangle).
- **View**, which allows only limited, immutable access to the smart contract state, and
  therefore does not result in a state update. Views are always initiated through
  off-ledger function calls. Since they do not require a state update on the ledger they
  can be used to efficiently query the current state of the smart contract.

To support this function call type distinction, Func and View functions each receive a
separate, different call context through WasmLib. Only the functionality that is necessary
for their implementation can be accessed through their respective WasmLib contexts,
`ScFuncContext` and `ScViewContext`. ScViewContext provides a limited, immutable subset of
the full functionality provided by ScFuncContext. By having separate context types,
compile-time type-checking can easily be used to enforce these usage constraints.

# Smart Contract Setup

An important part of setting up a smart contract is defining exactly which Funcs and Views
are available and informing the host about them through WasmLib. The host will have to be
able to dispatch requested function calls to the corresponding smart contract code and
will have to apply any restrictions necessary to prevent Views from accidentally accessing
full Func functionality.

Another important part is to define for each function exactly what parameters and return
values are expected/available, if any. The ISC stores parameter, state, and result values
in simple dictionaries, with both keys and values being arbitrary byte strings. Normally,
programming languages provide a much richer set of data types, which means that these data
types will need to be serialized and deserialized correctly and consistently. WasmLib
provides a rich set of (de)serialization functions specifically for this purpose

Even though it is definitely possible for a contract creator to directly use WasmLib to
achieve his goals, we decided to provide a _Schema Tool_, which can be used to
automatically generate and update the entire smart contract framework code in the desired
language in a consistent and type-safe way.

In the next section we will introduce this smart contract [`Schema Tool`](schema.mdx).
