---
description: Explore the key features of IOTA, including the Tangle, feeless transactions, data transfer, and energy efficiency. Learn how IOTA revolutionizes the blockchain industry with its innovative protocols.
image: /img/logo/Chrysalis_logo_dark.png
keywords:
  - IOTA
  - Tangle
  - feeless transactions
  - data transfer
  - energy efficiency
  - decentralized
  - blockchain
---

# Introduction to IOTA

IOTA is a distributed ledger technology (DLT) that empowers individuals to have control over their private data, run
tamper-proof programs, and engage in asset ownership and trading without the need for intermediaries. DLTs, as the name
suggests, maintain a ledger of token ownership across multiple nodes. However, unlike centralized systems, DLTs require
consensus among independent nodes to agree on the ledger's state. This introduces the challenge of protecting the
network from malicious actors. IOTA takes a unique approach, setting it apart from other protocols.

## The Tangle

The core of IOTA lies in the Tangle, a structure where new transactions validate previous ones, in contrast to the
typical blockchain used by most DLTs. In blockchain-based systems, transactions are grouped into blocks and linked
together, creating a natural bottleneck. However, IOTA bypasses this limitation by utilizing the Tangle, which allows
for a more scalable and efficient network. It eliminates the need for centralized validation and offers a decentralized
and secure environment for transactions and data exchange.

The Tangle is a replicated data structure across a network of nodes, forming a directed acyclic graph of blocks. It
enables parallel validation of transactions without total ordering, eliminating intermediaries and offering a highly
performant consensus and ledger solution.

## Data Transfer

IOTA allows fast, secure, and free transfer of data, opening up a wide array of use cases. Clients send and receive
messages through nodes, facilitating decentralized transport of data and value in a single message with the highest
security grade and zero fees.

## Feeless Transactions

Unlike traditional cryptocurrencies, IOTA requires no fees for transaction processing. The amount deducted from the
sender's wallet is exactly the same as the amount added to the recipient's wallet, making transactions seamless and
cost-effective.

## Energy Efficiency

IOTA prides itself on its lightweight and energy-efficient network. Designed to minimize energy consumption, the IOTA
network ensures efficient transaction processing while reducing environmental impact.

Explore the full details of IOTA's innovative features, including the Tangle, feeless transactions, data transfer, and
energy efficiency, driving the future of blockchain technology.

## Continuous Innovation

The IOTA protocol is continuously evolving through research and development. It consists of two main public networks:
the [IOTA mainnet](mainnet.md), which is the stable network used for managing IOTA tokens,
and [Shimmer, the staging network](../shimmer/staging-canary.md) for testing and deploying the latest protocol updates.
The Shimmer network acts as a testing ground to validate new features and improvements before they are implemented on
the mainnet. The upcoming significant update for IOTA is Stardust, and it is part of the ongoing effort called
Coordicide, which aims to achieve full decentralization.
